In a corner of the city, inside a tall, narrow house at Number 4 rue Vauborel, on the sixth
and highest floor, a sightless sixteen-year-old named Marie-Laure LeBlanc kneels over a
low table covered entirely with a model. The model is a miniature of the city she kneels
within, and contains scale replicas of the hundreds of houses and shops and hotels within
its walls. There’s the cathedral with its perforated spire, and the bulky old Château de
Saint-Malo, and row after row of seaside mansions studded with chimneys. A slender
wooden jetty arcs out from a beach called the Plage du Môle; a delicate, reticulated
atrium vaults over the seafood market; minute benches, the smallest no larger than
apple seeds, dot the tiny public squares.
Marie-Laure runs her fingertips along the centimeter-wide parapet crowning the
ramparts, drawing an uneven star shape around the entire model. She finds the opening
atop the walls where four ceremonial cannons point to sea. “Bastion de la Hollande,” she
whispers, and her fingers walk down a little staircase. “Rue des Cordiers. Rue Jacques
Cartier.”
In a corner of the room stand two galvanized buckets filled to the rim with water. Fill
them up, her great-uncle has taught her, whenever you can. The bathtub on the third
floor too. Who knows when the water will go out again.
Her fingerstravel back to the cathedral spire. South to the Gate of Dinan. All evening she
has been marching her fingers around the model, waiting for her great-uncle Etienne,
who owns this house, who went out the previous night while she slept, and who has not
returned. And now it is night again, another revolution of the clock, and the whole block
is quiet, and she cannot sleep.
She can hear the bombers when they are three miles away. A mounting static. The hum
inside a seashell.
When she opens the bedroom window, the noise of the airplanes becomes louder.
Otherwise, the night is dreadfully silent: no engines, no voices, no clatter. No sirens. No
footfalls on the cobbles. Not even gulls. Just a high tide, one block away and six stories
below, lapping at the base of the city walls.